doc/architecture/index.rst, before:

.. _introduction:

************
Introduction
************

Welcome to the architecture documentation of Univention Corporate Server (UCS).

This document is for consultants, administrators, solution architects, software
developers and system engineers. It describes the technical architecture of UCS
on three different detail levels.

.. TODO Remove this sentence once the whole document is done.

The document is released iteratively after each part is finished. The beginning
is at the first, high level.

Detail levels
=============

The first, high level :ref:`classifies UCS in the known IT world
<classification>` and describes the :ref:`concepts <concepts>`. This view helps
readers to understand the principles of UCS.

The second, medium level is for administrators and solution architects. It
covers the :ref:`product components <product-components>` and the :ref:`numerous
services <services>` UCS offers to IT infrastructures.  Software developers and
system engineers get an overview of the technical parts.  A general
understanding of the mentioned protocols is beneficial for understanding.

The third, low level is about the :ref:`libraries <libraries>`, :ref:`internal
systems and storage <systems-storage>`. It describes the pieces a software
developer and system engineer needs to know to contribute to UCS. General
knowledge of software architecture and software engineering are helpful at this
level.

Learning objectives
===================

After reading this document you have a broad understanding of the UCS
architecture. It equips consultants, administrators and solution architects to
better plan their IT environment with UCS. It enables software developers and
system engineers to quicker dive into software development for UCS.

Commit message:

Bug #54353: Deactivate references to not yet existing sections

doc/architecture/index.rst, after:

.. _introduction:

************
Introduction
************

Welcome to the architecture documentation of Univention Corporate Server (UCS).

This document is for consultants, administrators, solution architects, software
developers and system engineers. It describes the technical architecture of UCS
on three different detail levels.

.. TODO Remove this sentence once the whole document is done.

The document is released iteratively after each part is finished. The beginning
is at the first, high level.

Detail levels
=============

The first, high level :ref:`classifies UCS in the known IT world
<classification>` and describes the :ref:`concepts <concepts>`. This view helps
readers to understand the principles of UCS.

.. TODO : Enable the references, once the sections are written:
   """covers the :ref:`product components <product-components>` and the :ref:`numerous
   services <services>` UCS offers to IT infrastructures.  Software developers and"""

The second, medium level is for administrators and solution architects. It
covers the product components and the numerous services UCS offers to IT
infrastructures. Software developers and system engineers get an overview of
the technical parts. A general understanding of the mentioned protocols is
beneficial for understanding.

.. TODO : Enable the references, once the sections are written:
   """The third, low level is about the :ref:`libraries <libraries>`, :ref:`internal
   systems and storage <systems-storage>`. It describes the pieces a software"""

The third, low level is about the libraries, internal systems and storage. It
describes the pieces a software developer and system engineer needs to know to
contribute to UCS. General knowledge of software architecture and software
engineering are helpful at this level.

Learning objectives
===================

After reading this document you have a broad understanding of the UCS
architecture. It equips consultants, administrators and solution architects to
better plan their IT environment with UCS. It enables software developers and
system engineers to quicker dive into software development for UCS.
