doc/architecture/components/index.rst, before:

.. _product-components:

******************
Product components
******************

.. How is "product component" defined in the scope of this document?
   Who is your target audience?
   What is your target audience's goal? Why are they reading this document?
   What do your readers already know before they read your document?
   What should your readers know or be able to do after they read your document?

In this part of the document, you dive into the second, medium, detail level of
the architecture of Univention Corporate Server (UCS). You learn about UCS
product components that you face directly when you use UCS. The product
components typically act as entry points for your tasks.

The following product components introduce themselves in the order you will most
likely encounter them when you work with UCS:

#. :ref:`component-portal`
#. :ref:`component-management-system`
#. :ref:`component-app-center`
#. :ref:`component-file-print-services`
#. :ref:`component-command-line`

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2
   :hidden:

   portal
   management-system
   app-center
   file-print-services
   command-line

Commit message:

Bug #54354: Intro components: add audience

doc/architecture/components/index.rst, after:

.. _product-components:

******************
Product components
******************

.. How is "product component" defined in the scope of this document?
   Who is your target audience?
   What is your target audience's goal? Why are they reading this document?
   What do your readers already know before they read your document?
   What should your readers know or be able to do after they read your document?

In this part of the document, you dive into the second, medium, detail level of
the architecture of Univention Corporate Server (UCS). You learn about UCS
product components that you face directly when you use UCS. The product
components typically act as entry points for your tasks.

The description of the product components is for administrators and solution
architects. For software developers and system engineers it provides the context
for the architectural dive-in to UCS. Make sure you are familiar with the
:ref:`concepts` behind UCS.

The following product components introduce themselves in the order you will most
likely encounter them when you work with UCS:

#. :ref:`component-portal`
#. :ref:`component-management-system`
#. :ref:`component-app-center`
#. :ref:`component-file-print-services`
#. :ref:`component-command-line`

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2
   :hidden:

   portal
   management-system
   app-center
   file-print-services
   command-line
